# Go Reference

The `lox` tool analyzes both the grammar and Go files in the parser package.

**It is important to always use the latest Lox release, especially after
updating the Go toolchain.**

## Token Type

The parser package must define a type called `Token` which Lox will use to
represent tokens. `Token` must also be the same type returned by the lexer. If
your project is using
[simplelexer](https://github.com/dcaiafa/loxlex/simplelexer) (recommended for
beginners), then `Token` must be an alias to simplelexer's `Token` type:


```go
type Token = simplelexer.Token
```

## Parser Type

The parser package must also define a parser type. The name is not important,
but it must embed the type `lox` which will be generated by the lox tool:

```go
type myParser struct {
  lox

  // Other fields.
}

```

Embedding `lox` marks the type as the parser type. Lox will look for actions in
this type, and it will also generate methods in this type.

## Action Methods

Each grammar production must have a corresponding Go action method to be
executed by the parser when it reduces that production. The production method
must be defined on the [parser type](#parser-type). The name of the method must
follow the pattern `on_<rule>` or `on_<rule>__<suffix>` where `<rule>` is the
name of the rule that defines the production and `<suffix>` is an optional
string to allow multiple action methods for the same rule. The actual value of
`<suffix>` is not important, and is ignored by Lox.

The action method must return a single result. If a rule has more than one
action methods, they must return the same type. Each production term must
correspond to an action parameter. The Go type of the rule or token referenced
by the term must be [assignable](https://go.dev/ref/spec#Assignability) to its
corresponding parameter type.

An action method must match a single production. Lox will report an error if an
action method can be matched to multiple productions.

For example:

```lox
statement = ID '=' expr
          | 'call' ID

```
```go
func (p *myParser) on_statement__assign(id Token, _ Token, e Expr) Statement {
    return &AssignStat{id, e}
}

func (p *myParser) on_statement__call(_ Token, id Token) Statement {
    return &CallStat{id}
}
```
The method `on_statement__assign` matches the production `statement = ID '='
expr` because:
* `on_statement` matches the rule `statement` (the suffix `__assign` is
  ignored).
* `id Token` matches the term `ID` (all tokens match the `Token` type).
* `_ Token` matches the term `=` (the parameter name is not important, just the
  type).
* `e Expr` matches the term `expr` (assuming that there is a rule `expr` whose
  actions return `Expr`).

## _onBounds

If your parser defines a method called `_onBounds` with the 
