# Parser Reference

A parser's purpose is to transform a sequence of tokens into high-level
programming constructs that represent the syntactical structure of the input
according to a defined grammar.

For example, the expression `1 + 2 * 3` can be transformed into an Abstract
Syntax Tree (AST) as shown below:

```
        Binary
      Expression
          +
        /   \
       /     \
  Literal    Binary
     1       Expression
                 *
               /   \
              /     \
          Literal  Literal
            2        3
```

## Parser Section

Parser declarations are contained in a parser section which is signaled using
the keyword `@parser`.

```lox
@parser

// Parser declarations

```

## Rules

Parser rules are the fundamental building blocks of the parser. They define
transformations of terminals (tokens) and non-terminals (other rules) and can
themselves be referenced as terms in other rule productions, including
recursively. The parser rule syntax resembles the
[extended-Backus-Naur form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_Backus%E2%80%93Naur_form)
(EBNF).

The Lox rule syntax itself can be expressed concisely in Lox:
```lox
rule      = '@start'? ID '=' @list(prod, '|') NL
prod      = term_card+ qualif?
          | '@empty'

term_card = term card?
term      = ID | LITERAL | '@error' | list
list      = '@list' '(' term ',' term ')'
card      = '*' | '*!' | '+' | '?'
qualif    = '@left' '(' NUM ')'
          | '@right' '(' NUM ')'
```
Let's take a closer look at the following example rule:

```lox
prod = term_card+ qualif?
     | '@empty'

```

* `prod` is the name of the rule.
* `term_card+ qualif?` and `'@empty'` are the rule's productions.
* `term_card+` and `qualif?` are terms in the first production.
* `term_card` and `qualif` reference other rules.
* `+` is a cardinality, indicating that one or more `term_card`s are expected.
  Likewise, `?` indicates that zero or one `qualif` is expected.
* `'@empty'` is a token, referenced by its literal form.

**Nota Bene:**

* Rule names must be valid [Go
identifiers](https://go.dev/ref/spec#Identifiers) with the following additional
restrictions:
  - **Must not** start with an underscore (`_`).
  - **Must not** contain consecutive underscores.

### Start Rule

One, and only one rule, must be marked as the root or start rule using the
`@start` keyword. The start rule is the parser's goal; when the parser reduces
the start rule, parsing completes successfully.

Example:
```lox
@start program = statement*
```

### Empty Production

A production that matches the empty string - often represented in formal grammar
by the Greek letter episilon (ε) - must use the `@empty` keyword in place of
terms.

Example:
```lox
optional_number = NUMBER | @empty
```
In this example, the rule `optional_number` can be reduced by matching a `NUMBER`
token, or by matching nothing at all (i.e., the empty string).

## Term Cardinality

A term can be annotated with a cardinality modifier, which determines how many
instances of the term can be matched. Cardinality is used to specify optional,
repeated, or required patterns within a rule. 

### Optional (?)

`?` indicates that a term is optional.

Example:

```lox
some_rule = some_term?

// Generated by Lox:
some_term? = some_term
           | @empty
```

### One or More (+)

`+` indicates that a term can be matched one or more times.

Example:
```lox
some_rule = some_term+

// Generated by Lox:
some_term+ = some_term+ some_term
           | some_term
```

### Zero or More (*)

`*` indicates that a term can be matched zero or more times.

Example:
```lox
some_rule = some_term*

// Generated by Lox:
some_term*  = some_term+?
some_term+? = some_term+
            | @empty
some_term+  = some_term+ some_term
            | some_term
```

### List (@list)

`@list(elem, sep)` indicates that the term will match `elem` one or more times
while separated by `sep`.

Example:
```lox
some_rule = @list(some_term, ',')

@list(some_term, ',') = @list(some_term, ',') ',' some_term
                      | some_term
```

`@list` can be further qualified with a `?` to match a list of zero or more
elements.

## Conflicts

If you try to process the following grammar snippet with `lox` it fail with an
error like `grammar has conflicts`. The problem is that this grammar is
ambiguous:

```lox
expression = expression `+` expression
           | expression `*` expression
           | NUMBER
```

Consider the input `1 + 2 * 3` where numbers are parsed as the token `NUMBER`.
Let's try to parse this input, step by step.

```
- Lookahead: NUMBER(1)
  Stack: 
  Action: shift NUMBER(1)

- Lookahead: +
  Stack: NUMBER(1)
  Action: reduce NUMBER(1) => expression

- Lookahead: +
  Stack: expression
  Action: shift +

- Lookahead: NUMBER(2)
  Stack: expression +
  Action: shift NUMBER(2)

- Lookahead: *
  Stack: expression + expression
  Action: ???
```
What action should the parser take at this point? Should it shift the `*` or
should it reduce `expression + expression`? It is not clear what to do from the
grammar alone. This is called a shift-reduce conflict (the other class of
conflicts is called reduce-reduce conflicts).


